Add documentation for gateway installation and management (#9706)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/setup/install/gateway/index.md

---
title: Installing Gateways
description: Install and customize Istio Gateways.
weight: 40
keywords: [install,gateway,kubernetes]
owner: istio/wg-environments-maintainers
test: no
---

Along with creating a service mesh, Istio allows managing [gateways](/docs/concepts/traffic-management/#gateways),
which run at the edge of the mesh and allow fine-grained control over traffic entering and leaving the mesh.

Follow this guide to deploy one or more gateways.

## Prerequisites

This guide requires the Istio control plane [to be installed](/docs/setup/install/) before proceeding.

> ## Installing the gateway with injection

Reviewer: Ah, I see this is a TODO in your description above. My suggestion:

Add a section, before this one, that talks about "Gateway installation options". You could include the material from the doc I referenced above, and then also discuss the shortcomings and that template injection is a better approach. That would be followed by this section, which is an implied recommended approach, even if we don't say that explicitly yet, since the feature is still alpha.

> ## Installing the gateway with injection

Reviewer: > I see what you mean but this seems similar to multicluster, which the comments apply to equally, so it may be good to make them consistent? Seems like either both should be under install/, or they should both be split?

I tend to agree that this is not the right place for this doc. The difference is that every other doc actually installs Istio (i.e., starts 1 or more control planes). This is really part of configuring the mesh. The external control plane doc really makes this clear by describing the gateway install steps under "mesh admin steps", while the the rest of the Istio setup is the "mesh operator steps". (As an aside, for the same reason, I think that maybe the External Control Plane installation doc should be moved here.)

That said, I tend to think that maybe the best place for this is under "More Guides". It really is important, so I also think that every other install doc should have one or more clear references to this guide, so users don't miss it.

> ## Installing the gateway with injection

Reviewer: Also, if we move this to the "More Guides" section, we could also add a reference on the _index.md page, i.e., after `Choose the guide that best suits your needs and platform.`, add another sentence something like `To install gateways in a mesh, refer to [Installing Gateways](link) for details`.

> ## Installing the gateway with injection

Reviewer: https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/9727

> ## Installing the gateway with injection

Author: I moved it under more guides

To support users that already utilize existing deployment tools, we provide a few different ways to deploy a gateway.
Each method will result in the same outcome; we recommend choosing the method you are most familiar with.

> If you are not sure which to choose, we suggest the Simple YAML method.

Reviewer 2: Linkify the "Simple YAML" part? Assuming we can link to that?

> If you are not sure which to choose, we suggest the Simple YAML method.

Reviewer 2: Why are we recommending that one? It actually looks the most complicated in terms of what the user needs to manage.

Author: Its subjective which is "best", but I prefer it because:
* Its using plain Kubernetes APIs, which are understood by all users, rather than our own (undocumented) Helm values API
* It is the most flexible
* It is the only way we have right now to safely canary upgrade a gateway. The (current unwritten) upgrade section will likely depend on this for some upgrade options
* No extra tools required

I would not be surprised at all if many disagree. But if I was not familiar with helm, I would probably not want to go learn a new tool; If I am familiar with helm the line above recommends choosing what the user is familiar with.

I am ok with changing the recommended path if others have a different preference

Reviewer 2: Well if they're using Istio they're already likely using either istioctl or helm right? It seems unlikely they don't have either of those...And both of those are MUCH shorter than the full yaml.

To avoid this we could just drop the sentence and not make a recommendation at all, then the previous sentence just tells them to use what they're familiar with and we're good.

> As a security best practice, it is recommended to deploy the gateway in different namespace from the control plane.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a security best practice, it is recommended to deploy the gateway in a different namespace from the control plane.
```

Using the same mechanisms as [Istio sidecar injection](/docs/setup/additional-setup/sidecar-injection/#automatic-sidecar-injection), Istio allows the required
options for gateways to run to be automatically injected.

> This enables developers to have full control over the gateway deployment, while simplifying operations - when a new upgrade is available, or a configuration has changed, gateway pods can simply be restarted to be updated.

Reviewer 3: What are the customizations that can be done currently when using auto gateway injection and how can users do that?

Author: Its just a standard Kubernetes pod/deployment. You should be able to set whatever options you want following Kubernetes docs (`kubectl explain pod`)

This makes the experience of operating a gateway deployment the same as operating sidecars.

{{< tabset category-name="gateway-install-type" >}}

{{< tab name="Simple YAML" category-value="yaml" >}}

First, setup the Kubernetes configuration, called `ingress.yaml` here:

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: istio-ingressgateway
  namespace: istio-ingress
spec:
  type: LoadBalancer
  selector:
    istio: ingressgateway
  ports:
  - port: 80
    name: http
  - port: 443
    name: https
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: istio-ingressgateway
  namespace: istio-ingress
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      istio: ingressgateway
  template:
    metadata:
      annotations:
        # Enable gateway injection

>         inject.istio.io/templates: gateway

Reviewer 3: Is this annotation documented in the reference/annotations section? What are the supported values?

Author: I did add it in https://github.com/istio/api/pull/1956 but I don't see it on istio.io so I don't know whats going on there.. maybe the reference docs are not updated?

Reviewer: Maybe it needs a cherrypick to release-1.10?

Author: That was it, thanks Frank! I sent a cherrypick

Reviewer 3: I see the new documentation https://preliminary.istio.io/latest/docs/setup/additional-setup/sidecar-injection/#custom-templates-experimental and the annotation getting added but I still don't see what are the templates available in Istio. Is it sidecar and gateway currently?

      labels:

>         # Set a unique label for the gateway. This is required to ensure Gateway's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        # Set a unique label for the gateway. This is required to ensure Gateways
```

        # can select this workload
        istio: ingressgateway

>         # Enable gateway injection. If connecting to a revisioned control plane, replace with

Reviewer 2: Both the annotation above and label here have a comment saying "enable injection". Maybe clarify why both are needed?

On the annotation we could indicate that it can be used to select different templates if desired.

        # `istio.io/rev: <revision-name>`.

>         sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"

Reviewer 3: We need this label too?

Author: You can either label the entire namespace or label the pod itself. This is how injection works in general, and is not specific to gateway injection. I will make it more clear

Author: I added a note

Reviewer 3: Yeah, using `sidecar.istio.io/inject` annotation for gateways feels wrong to me..

Reviewer: I think the problem is that the `inject` annotation name is just too specific. It would be better named `proxy.istio.io/inject`. Could we add a new annotation (and maybe deprecate `sidecar.istio.io/inject`)?

Author: Aside from normal API migration pains, it would be extremely difficult to make this change. The mutating webhook already has 8 distinct label selection clauses in order to handle the complex (internal) logic we want to expose to users (in a hopefully simple to understand scheme) while keeping backwards compatibility. It would probably be exponentially worse to try to add another one.

It is a label btw, not an annotation

Reviewer: I see your point. The name's not ideal, but it is what it is.

    spec:
      containers:
      - name: istio-proxy

>         image: auto # The image will automatically update each time the pod starts.

Reviewer 3: 'auto' looks like a magic word here. Where will we document this API?

Author: This is the documentation :-). Its also here: https://preliminary.istio.io/latest/docs/setup/additional-setup/sidecar-injection/#customizing-injection

        # Set a unique label for the gateway. This is required to ensure Gateway's
        # can select this workload
        istio: ingressgateway
  values:
    gateways:
      istio-ingressgateway:
        # Enable gateway injection
        injectionTemplate: gateway
{{< /text >}}

Then install using standard `istioctl` commands:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl create namespace istio-ingress
$ istioctl install -f ingress.yaml
{{< /text >}}

{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab name="Helm" category-value="helm" >}}

First, set up a values configuration file, called `values.yaml` here:

{{< text yaml >}}
gateways:
  istio-ingressgateway:
    # Enable gateway injection
    injectionTemplate: gateway
    # Set a name for the gateway
    name: ingressgateway
    labels:
      # Set a unique label for the gateway. This is required to ensure Gateway's
      # can select this workload
      istio: ingressgateway
{{< /text >}}

Then install using standard `helm` commands:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl create namespace istio-ingress
$ helm install istio-ingress manifests/charts/gateways/istio-ingress -n istio-ingress -f values.yaml
{{< /text >}}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabset >}}

## Managing gateways

> Below describes how to manage gateways after installation. For more information on their usage, follow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following describes how to manage gateways after installation. For more information on their usage, follow
```

the [Ingress](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/) and [Egress](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/) tasks.

### Gateway selectors

> The labels chosen on the gateway pods are important as they are used by Gateway selectors, so it is important your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The labels chosen on the gateway pods are used by Gateway selectors, so it is important that your
```
